[Unknown]: IVM
[Amit Varma]: You think you're very smart, don't you?
[Amit Varma]: Well, it depends on how you look at it.
[Amit Varma]: Compared to a chimpanzee, for example,
[Amit Varma]: you're quite smart.
[Amit Varma]: Compared to many of your fellow humans also,
[Amit Varma]: you might qualify as smart.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, why else would you listen to this podcast?
[Amit Varma]: However, compared to AlphaZero,
[Amit Varma]: you're not smart at all.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, compared to AlphaZero,
[Amit Varma]: both you and I are incredibly stupid.
[Amit Varma]: We're as dumb as rocks.
[Amit Varma]: Which is fine, because hey, it's no crime to be stupid.
[Amit Varma]: We have the brains we are born with.
[Amit Varma]: What are we going to do?
[Amit Varma]: So being stupid is not a problem,
[Amit Varma]: but our problem is that we are stupid and arrogant.
[Amit Varma]: Oh my God, we are so arrogant.
[Amit Varma]: We think we are the smartest species on this planet,
[Amit Varma]: which used to be true till recently.
[Amit Varma]: But it no longer is.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen,
[Unknown]: our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get into today's episode,
[Amit Varma]: a brief note from our sponsor for this episode.
[Amit Varma]: Are you one of those people, as I used to be,
[Amit Varma]: who enjoy art but somehow never got into actually collecting art
[Amit Varma]: because hey, paintings by good artists are scarce and expensive?
[Amit Varma]: Well, then check out IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors licenses images from top Indian artists
[Amit Varma]: and puts them on objects of everyday use.
[Amit Varma]: There's wearable art like kaftans, shrugs, some lovely strolls.
[Amit Varma]: There's home decor like cushion covers, accessories like tote bags.
[Amit Varma]: Artists get royalties on sales of these products,
[Amit Varma]: which I find an interesting new model.
[Amit Varma]: Normally, authors get royalties on books
[Amit Varma]: and artists only get paid once when they sell the original painting.
[Amit Varma]: This gives them a new revenue stream
[Amit Varma]: and it also makes art accessible for people like me
[Amit Varma]: because we can finally afford to buy it.
[Amit Varma]: Even better, there's a sale on right now.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to IndianColors.com,
[Amit Varma]: colors spelled with O-U, not just O,
[Amit Varma]: and apply the coupon code IVM20,
[Amit Varma]: IVM for IndusWorks Media, IVM20 to get a 20% discount.
[Amit Varma]: Remember, IndianColors.com and colors with an O-U.
[Amit Varma]: And now on with our regular programming.
[Amit Varma]: Today's episode is about AlphaZero,
[Amit Varma]: the computer program that created waves recently
[Amit Varma]: when it taught itself to play chess in four hours
[Amit Varma]: and then thrashed the strongest chess program in the world,
[Amit Varma]: the mighty Stockfish.
[Amit Varma]: This wasn't just an incremental leap in artificial intelligence,
[Amit Varma]: but was indicative of a quantum leap.
[Amit Varma]: To get more insight on this,
[Amit Varma]: I spoke recently to my friend Devangshu Dutta.
[Amit Varma]: Devangshu, or DD as his friends call him,
[Amit Varma]: is not just a noted columnist and financial analyst,
[Amit Varma]: but also a serious chess player.
[Amit Varma]: His chess column every Saturday in Business Standard
[Amit Varma]: has been running since the last millennium.
[Amit Varma]: I've always found him to be a source of great insight
[Amit Varma]: on both chess and artificial intelligence.
[Amit Varma]: Here's the conversation I had with him.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, Devangshu.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Devangshu, let me start by asking you about AlphaZero's achievement.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, computers have been around for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: Deep Blue first beat Kasparov in 1997,
[Amit Varma]: and computers overtook humans in terms of playing strength
[Amit Varma]: a long, long time back.
[Amit Varma]: What is so special about AlphaZero?
[Guest]: Two things, really.
[Guest]: One is that it thinks differently,
[Guest]: if one can use the word think for a computer.
[Guest]: The second is that it is,
[Guest]: at least from the few games that have been released,
[Guest]: of its match with Stockfish,
[Guest]: it is considerably stronger than
[Guest]: the strongest chess-playing engines
[Guest]: which are available commercially.
[Guest]: It is also,
[Guest]: the third thing which is, of course, one is taking on trust,
[Guest]: is that it taught itself,
[Guest]: and it taught itself very quickly,
[Amit Varma]: how to play chess.
[Amit Varma]: Can you tell me a little bit about how computers,
[Amit Varma]: before AlphaZero and all the decades past,
[Amit Varma]: approached chess and what the artificial intelligence
[Amit Varma]: to figuring out chess was?
[Guest]: From the 90s onwards,
[Guest]: and you know Moore's law
[Guest]: that processors essentially double in strength
[Guest]: every two years or so,
[Guest]: from the 90s onwards,
[Guest]: computers have essentially worked on the brute force method.
[Guest]: You look at every possible move in a position,
[Guest]: you look at every possible response to that move,
[Guest]: you carry on doing this to the kind of depth
[Guest]: that time and the processing power allows you,
[Guest]: and you come to an evaluation of what you think is the best move.
[Guest]: I'm using the word you and think very loosely here, obviously.
[Guest]: From the 2000s,
[Guest]: what happened was that
[Guest]: people figured out how to get
[Guest]: computers to evaluate positions more efficiently.
[Guest]: You had a lot of
[Guest]: basic things every decent chess player is taught.
[Guest]: You look at mating possibilities,
[Guest]: you look at material advantage,
[Guest]: you look at pawn structure,
[Guest]: you look at more space control,
[Guest]: stuff like that.
[Guest]: People managed to
[Guest]: program these into computers
[Guest]: in a fairly mathematically exact way.
[Guest]: The computer had these benchmarks for
[Guest]: rules for evaluating positions,
[Guest]: and you also had
[Guest]: a lot of very clever
[Guest]: techniques used to prune
[Guest]: the search process,
[Guest]: because the problem with chess, of course,
[Guest]: is that it involves a huge number of possibilities.
[Guest]: The deeper you go, the more and more the possibilities expand.
[Guest]: What chess programmers managed to do was
[Guest]: use a variation of
[Guest]: the minimax algorithm where you look at
[Guest]: the move that can give you the maximum advantage and
[Guest]: you assume that your opponent will also be looking at
[Guest]: the move that can give him the maximum advantage.
[Guest]: So your maximum is his minimum,
[Guest]: because this is a zero-sum game.
[Guest]: And you keep continuously saying that,
[Guest]: okay, my maximum advantage is, say, a pawn up,
[Guest]: and my maximum disadvantage is, say, a pawn down.
[Guest]: And you keep chucking out the possibilities which are
[Guest]: worse than a pawn down,
[Guest]: and you keep looking for the possibilities which are better than a pawn up.
[Guest]: So, you know, you look at a possible move, number one,
[Guest]: and you say, okay, this is my best and this is my worst
[Guest]: possible outcomes. And then you look at move two,
[Guest]: and if you see move two is giving you a
[Guest]: better than your previous best, then you'll go
[Guest]: automatically to move two and discard move one.
[Guest]: Now, this is a fairly efficient process,
[Guest]: and it made
[Guest]: programs stronger. Stronger in the sense that if you
[Guest]: use the programs post-2000
[Guest]: on 1990s hardware,
[Guest]: you'll still get better results than you would with the programs of
[Guest]: the 1990s. And of course, since hardware was improving,
[Guest]: this process got better and better and better.
[Amit Varma]: So let me sort of summarize it so far,
[Amit Varma]: so you can tell me if my understanding is correct.
[Amit Varma]: How humans typically learn chess is
[Amit Varma]: because our computational powers are limited, we use shortcuts called heuristics.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, we are taught things like you should occupy the center first,
[Amit Varma]: and these pawn structures are good, and your bishop should have a lot of space to move,
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, you need to develop your pieces,
[Amit Varma]: don't move a piece twice in the opening, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And using these heuristics, we sort of learn the game, and
[Amit Varma]: obviously, as we grow more and more advanced, we learn better and better heuristics.
[Amit Varma]: And these are all shortcuts to calculation.
[Amit Varma]: Now, computers, theoretically, you'd imagine,
[Amit Varma]: would, given processing power, would just need to know the rules,
[Amit Varma]: and they'd use brute force, and they'd see through every move,
[Amit Varma]: and solve the game. But what you're saying is this is not exactly
[Amit Varma]: what happened. How they instead evolved was they got a lot of brute force to do
[Amit Varma]: enormous amounts of calculation completely, but the game wasn't solved per se,
[Amit Varma]: and different programs evolved in different ways depending
[Amit Varma]: on heuristics that were fed to them, which were a combination of the heuristics
[Amit Varma]: humans learnt about chess, and therefore those biases, if they were at all,
[Amit Varma]: also got fed into the system, and were also specific heuristics,
[Amit Varma]: which allowed it to prune down decision trees, and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: satisfies, I don't know if that's a correct word in this context,
[Amit Varma]: but just keep taking better decisions like that.
[Amit Varma]: Is that broadly accurate, what I just summed up?
[Guest]: Broadly, yes. And, of course, the thing with the brute force,
[Guest]: part of it is that you could completely solve, say, positions which had
[Guest]: not more than seven pieces on the board, not more than six pieces on the board,
[Guest]: which also helped you to extrapolate backwards, you know.
[Guest]: When you have nine pieces on the board, a computer will play almost perfectly
[Guest]: because it can flash to a position where there would be just seven pieces,
[Guest]: and it knows that position is either win, loss, or draw.
[Guest]: So, yeah, so, yes, you worked out, but essentially this was human beings
[Guest]: teaching computers to sort of think like computers, but with an enormous amount
[Guest]: of processing power thrown in, and hence being able to calculate
[Guest]: in far greater depth.
[Guest]: There was also the other thing is you would normally feed in, you know,
[Guest]: a million games or four million games where stuff that human beings
[Guest]: had learned, say, opening systems, which we had discovered over the course
[Guest]: of a lot of practice that, you know, a certain move in the opening was
[Guest]: probably better than any other move in that particular position.
[Guest]: That kind of knowledge was also fed in in terms of opening books,
[Guest]: which were assimilated by computers.
[Amit Varma]: And to be clear, computers got so strong that no human could possibly beat
[Amit Varma]: any of the top software programs anymore.
[Guest]: Oh, yes, you can take circa 2012, say, you could take a normal off-the-shelf
[Guest]: Android cell phone and a free program, an early version of Stock Fix,
[Guest]: for example, and it would have beaten a world champion, you know,
[Guest]: 100 times out of 100.
[Guest]: It would be the equivalent of, let's say, Usain Bolt trying to outrun
[Guest]: a Maruti 800.
[Guest]: If you want to use a similar analogy, a Maruti 800 isn't a particularly
[Guest]: powerful or quick car, but it can beat a world-class splinter, hollow.
[Amit Varma]: So, before I get to AlphaZero, I want to sort of take a digression
[Amit Varma]: into a subject in which you and I have had a bunch of fascinating
[Amit Varma]: conversations, which I found really enlightening.
[Amit Varma]: One always assumes that when computers get into anything, it takes on
[Amit Varma]: almost a machine-like quality, and therefore there could be that
[Amit Varma]: clichéd assumption that if computers dominate chess and people are
[Amit Varma]: using computers to learn how to play chess, they'll all start playing
[Amit Varma]: in the same way, like machines.
[Amit Varma]: But actually, as you've often pointed out at length, it's exactly the opposite.
[Amit Varma]: Can you talk a little bit about that?
[Guest]: Yeah, what happened was first it democratised teaching, because
[Guest]: if you had access to the internet and you had access to a half-decent,
[Guest]: even a half-decent cell phone, you had a very powerful tool at your
[Guest]: command to learn how to play chess.
[Guest]: You could look through games simply by using the machine for analysis
[Guest]: and see that, oh, okay, this move works, that move doesn't.
[Guest]: And as a result, in earlier eras, what you had was chess schools.
[Guest]: For example, the Russians or Soviets had a lot of magnificent players,
[Guest]: and most of whom also ended up training a lot of very good players.
[Guest]: But India, in contrast, to use an obvious example, had nothing.
[Guest]: We didn't have good players, and we obviously did not have
[Guest]: good trainers as well.
[Guest]: The only downside to this, apart from the fact that you had clusters
[Guest]: where you had strong chess-playing countries and you had weak
[Guest]: chess-playing countries, was that every human chess player
[Guest]: has strong biases and dogmas.
[Guest]: For example, a highly tactical attacking player will tend to pass on
[Guest]: his assessment of positions to his pupils, who will tend to also
[Guest]: inherit those biases.
[Guest]: What happened when you started having this sort of computer-aided
[Guest]: analysis and coaching, for want of a better word, was a democratization
[Guest]: where those biases largely disappeared.
[Guest]: So you ended up having a new generation of players.
[Guest]: They're called Fritz Kids because Fritz was one of the early programs.
[Guest]: It's still a popular line in the chess engine programming.
[Guest]: They were called Fritz Kids.
[Guest]: They developed without a lot of these biases and baggage.
[Guest]: They also discovered the other thing which we learned when computers
[Guest]: started playing really well was that a lot of positions which humans
[Guest]: would just dismiss as completely won or completely drawn actually had
[Guest]: possibilities which humans had not appreciated, simply because computers
[Guest]: could calculate at greater depth than human beings.
[Guest]: So you also discovered a new generation who were very hard-nosed,
[Guest]: very concrete in terms of calculation, who would not take a value judgment
[Guest]: for granted.
[Guest]: They would be prepared to play positions which earlier generations
[Guest]: would have considered horrible just because they knew that there was
[Guest]: a computer evaluation saying this position is good or this position
[Guest]: is even just equal.
[Guest]: So yes, you had an enormous variation in terms of style and a lot of
[Guest]: modern players who play in ways which would earlier have been unclassifiable.
[Guest]: The other thing, of course, being that you have 24-7 online forums where
[Guest]: you can play chess with good players at any given point of the day or night
[Guest]: which is comfortable for you and it doesn't matter where you're sitting.
[Guest]: So again, you had, if you like, the 10,000 hours worth of practice which
[Guest]: an earlier generation would have had to develop over five years of trying
[Guest]: to play a few tournaments, etc. here and there.
[Guest]: You had that for a new generation that was being crammed into a much
[Guest]: shorter actual space of time.
[Guest]: Hence, you also had prodigies who, at the age of 13, 14, were developing
[Guest]: a huge amount of skill and who had styles and techniques which were
[Guest]: completely different from earlier generations.
[Amit Varma]: One thing I find interesting here is not just that the variation of play
[Amit Varma]: has gone up among human players and something that you're now seeing
[Amit Varma]: as a correspondence player is that, you've often told me, is that even
[Amit Varma]: the machines have different styles and play differently because they've
[Amit Varma]: kind of evolved in different directions.
[Guest]: Yes, this has also happened, for example, and it's something which you use
[Guest]: particularly in correspondence and analysis.
[Guest]: You sort of use a shorthand, you say that, okay, this is the kind of position
[Guest]: I would like to analyze with Junior because Junior is a highly tactical engine
[Guest]: and this is the kind of position I would like to analyze with Komodo
[Guest]: because Komodo is a very positional engine which looks for long-term
[Guest]: static advantages.
[Guest]: Yes, you also have variations, actually, in terms of number crunchings
[Guest]: in that certain engines are designed to be brute force number crunchers
[Guest]: to a maximal degree, others tend to make the evaluations faster.
[Guest]: So again, if you're doing an analysis in a limited period of time,
[Guest]: you would use a certain engine and you would keep switching engines
[Guest]: when you're looking for a human understanding of a position, that is,
[Guest]: you want to come to a conclusion that, is this position something I can make sense of?
[Guest]: And of course, really good players tend to also adapt engines to finding positions
[Guest]: that they like and that their opponents might be uncomfortable with.
[Guest]: Let's say someone like Aronian or Carlsen is not necessarily looking for
[Guest]: an outright concrete advantage when he's analyzing with a computer.
[Guest]: Aronian is looking for a position which he thinks Carlsen is not going to be comfortable in
[Guest]: and vice versa.
[Guest]: So you have these little variations which can actually be quite important
[Guest]: from a practical player's point of view.
[Guest]: Yes, that has certainly happened.
[Amit Varma]: And despite the sort of the fact that the existing computer engines or programs
[Amit Varma]: are different from each other, AlphaZero just seems to be a whole quantum leap ahead
[Amit Varma]: and one of the ways in which that is so is that it doesn't even really seem to be using brute force.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, it seemed to have worked out its own set of heuristics,
[Amit Varma]: some of which are very at odds with what we humans have traditionally been taught.
[Guest]: I think one of the problems here is that until and unless DeepMind ever releases
[Guest]: logs of those games, and ideally logs of all 100 games which it played with Stockfish,
[Guest]: you won't know for certain what its evaluations were.
[Guest]: Because if you have the log, then you know on a move-by-move basis this is how it rated,
[Guest]: let's say it's 19 possible moves and 26 possible responses its opponent might have had.
[Guest]: But yes, it runs slower in the sense that it seems to process far fewer positions per second.
[Guest]: DeepMind says that it processes about 80,000 positions per second, which is orders of magnitude less
[Guest]: than modern engines such as Stockfish processes millions of positions per second.
[Guest]: There is a caveat to that match. Stockfish was playing on hardware which I don't think was really up to the mark.
[Guest]: And it was playing at an odd time control with a lot of constraints,
[Guest]: but even so it would have been processing 3 or 4 million positions per second.
[Guest]: Whereas AlphaZero was just looking at 80,000.
[Guest]: The second part of this is that it seems to have learned things about chess
[Guest]: which take its understanding to a different level.
[Guest]: When you're looking at a computer analysis of a position,
[Guest]: even when a computer finds a shockingly good or surprising move,
[Guest]: it tends to be something which is practically beyond your thinking horizon
[Guest]: in the sense that it is seeing a combination which is 10 moves deep,
[Guest]: whereas as a human being your calculating ability simply doesn't go that deep.
[Guest]: In AlphaZero's case, what it seems to have, at least in the 10 games that were released,
[Guest]: what it seems to have found is positional evaluations where it's giving material
[Guest]: for what is apparently very nebulous compensation,
[Guest]: but you go deeper and deeper and there is a point at which you realize that
[Guest]: no, there is very strong compensation, but it is not tactical.
[Guest]: It is not as though you're finding 3 sacrifices in a row and forcing mate.
[Guest]: It is more like you're strangling your opponent with slowly depriving him of moves.
[Guest]: Him, again, is the wrong word to use, but you're slowly depriving your opponent of possible moves.
[Guest]: It is difficult to understand at that level.
[Guest]: It's the kind of chess which you can imagine someone like Anatoly Karpov playing
[Guest]: if Karpov could analyze 80,000 moves per second.
[Guest]: It seems to be an understanding which is well beyond the human.
[Guest]: It's not based on concrete calculation in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: On the one hand, it's not based on concrete calculations which other computers would excel at.
[Amit Varma]: At the same time, it's not based on heuristics which humans can even understand.
[Amit Varma]: I'm reminded of a quote on chess.com by Peter Hein Nelson,
[Amit Varma]: who is Magnus Carlsen II and earlier used to work with Anand.
[Amit Varma]: He said that, I've always wondered how aliens would play chess
[Amit Varma]: if a race of superior aliens came on to earth and played.
[Amit Varma]: And now I think I know, which kind of reveals a sort of awe with all of us who play chess,
[Amit Varma]: kind of looked at these games.
[Amit Varma]: I have two questions for you now.
[Amit Varma]: One really small and you need not spend much time on it,
[Amit Varma]: which are what are the implications of this for chess itself?
[Amit Varma]: And the second deeper one is,
[Amit Varma]: what are the implications of this for AI and human life in general, the way we are going?
[Guest]: The first one, I'm taking an analogy from Go,
[Guest]: because AlphaZero's earlier version played Go
[Guest]: and then of course they worked out this method of simply letting it play against itself
[Guest]: and learning the rules as it goes along.
[Guest]: What happened there is interesting in the sense that
[Guest]: AlphaGo, as that particular program was called,
[Guest]: beat world champions the first time it had happened in Go,
[Guest]: which is a much more complex game than chess.
[Guest]: And well, the world champions in question then looked at those games
[Guest]: and computer programmers also looked at those games
[Guest]: and as a result a year down the line you have much better Go programs being produced commercially.
[Guest]: You must remember that Alpha is running on specialized hardware
[Guest]: with enormous computing power, but you've actually had commercial programs coming out,
[Guest]: Crazy Stone for example, which play much better Go
[Guest]: and which seem to have at least imbibed some of the principles of learning
[Guest]: which the AlphaZero, AlphaGo matches seem to have thrown up.
[Guest]: Human beings now understand Go better than they did a year ago, which is amazing
[Guest]: considering that Go has been played for at least, you know,
[Guest]: there are recorded games going back 1200 years.
[Guest]: So you suddenly have this jump.
[Guest]: I suspect similar things will happen in chess,
[Guest]: because people will look at these games and they will say that
[Guest]: oh okay, you can maybe ask a computer to do this kind of thing.
[Guest]: The other part of this is that both in Go and chess,
[Guest]: Alpha seems to use a lot of Monte Carlo analysis
[Guest]: where it randomly plays games against itself with, you know,
[Guest]: all the possible moves in a given position which looks about equal.
[Guest]: And then it sort of makes a judgment on the basis of actually playing games with itself
[Guest]: as opposed to merely evaluating a position.
[Guest]: So I think you'll have some of those techniques being picked up
[Guest]: and incorporated in commercial programs possibly with a fair degree of success.
[Guest]: I would expect a year or two down the line that computer chess in general will have got stronger
[Guest]: and probably human beings will have learnt a bit more.
[Amit Varma]: And that will make even human chess so much more exciting
[Amit Varma]: because you'll have new styles and new sort of frontiers.
[Guest]: Yes, and I think you'll find that, you know,
[Guest]: there are 10-year-olds and 13-year-olds who are once again playing in ways
[Guest]: that even the 20-year-olds don't understand.
[Amit Varma]: I mean the 20-year-olds play chess, the 35-year-olds don't understand.
[Amit Varma]: Besides being a very active player, you've been a chess coach,
[Amit Varma]: you've worked with people like Surya Shekhar Ganguly and Tanya Sachdev and all that,
[Amit Varma]: and you've kind of seen these generational changes happening in any case, haven't you?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: Shudjo, for example, is a pre-computer era player.
[Guest]: I mean, Shudjo is in his late 30s now,
[Guest]: but he is a pre-computer era player in the sense that, you know,
[Guest]: he was already a pretty strong player and by the time computers became seriously useful.
[Guest]: Similarly with Tanya, she learned to play.
[Guest]: I haven't really worked with Tanya, by the way.
[Guest]: I have worked with Shandipan Tando, for example,
[Guest]: and I've worked with several of the, in a very random way, with several of the younger ones.
[Guest]: There is a difference in the way they play.
[Guest]: There is a difference in the way they play
[Guest]: and in the way that the average 16 and 18-year-old plays or evaluates positions nowadays.
[Guest]: That's very clear.
[Guest]: In general, standards have gotten much better.
[Guest]: The average 1800 or 2000 LO player of today knows a lot more
[Guest]: and is usually self-taught to a large degree.
[Guest]: There is a lot of coaching involved,
[Guest]: but a lot of them are self-taught in the sense that for every hour of coaching they've had,
[Guest]: they've played 10 hours of games with each other online
[Guest]: and they've worked maybe 20 hours with programs.
[Guest]: So, you know, the coaching to playing to self-analysis ratios are very different
[Guest]: and they've learned a lot.
[Guest]: They've taught themselves a lot more.
[Guest]: I think if AlphaGo is an example, AlphaZero is an example,
[Guest]: and it sets new boundaries,
[Guest]: I think you will find that over the next two, three years,
[Guest]: there will be a generation of chess players who learn even more
[Guest]: and who manage to incorporate some of that.
[Amit Varma]: Can't wait to see those games.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on now from chess to artificial intelligence.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: The interesting thing there is that if you think about it,
[Guest]: chess, Go, Game of Life, several other such games,
[Guest]: have very narrow, very simple rule sets.
[Guest]: You play it by, you know, the moves as such are very narrow, very well defined.
[Guest]: And can lead to immense amounts of complexity in practice.
[Guest]: You have similar things happening in nature.
[Guest]: For example, DNA...
[Guest]: Hello?
[Guest]: Yeah, I'm here.
[Guest]: Sorry.
[Guest]: For example, DNA combinations,
[Guest]: according to very simple, well understood rules,
[Guest]: things like protein folding,
[Guest]: which is again fairly important in terms of genetics,
[Guest]: again occurs according to fairly simple rules.
[Guest]: The problem is that human beings cannot number crunch
[Guest]: the enormous number of variations that can occur
[Guest]: by those very simple combinations.
[Guest]: The combinatorial possibilities, you know,
[Guest]: go beyond the bounds of computation very quickly.
[Guest]: In that sort of situation, something like AlphaZero
[Guest]: and this self-teaching method could actually come up with
[Guest]: basic scientific insights which we are not capable of,
[Guest]: which we cannot program into computers
[Guest]: because we don't understand them ourselves.
[Guest]: And these are also situations where even a really fast computer
[Guest]: cannot solve a protein folding problem by brute force.
[Guest]: So you have a great deal in the way of possibilities
[Guest]: of basic science breakthroughs
[Guest]: by using artificial intelligence in these areas.
[Guest]: The other thing which is fairly useful at a practical level
[Guest]: is that AI is usually the first primary learning process
[Guest]: where you're teaching an AI to do something is very human intensive.
[Guest]: For example, to take a very simple example,
[Guest]: when you put an autonomous car on the road,
[Guest]: you are feeding in tens of millions of pictures
[Guest]: and you're telling the car that this is an advertising billboard,
[Guest]: this is the back of a truck,
[Guest]: this is a human being standing on a zebra crossing,
[Guest]: this is a human being not standing on a zebra crossing,
[Guest]: this is a guy wearing a helmet on a bike, etc.
[Guest]: And a human being actually has to go through this process
[Guest]: of teaching the AI.
[Guest]: When it's gone wrong, one of the few fatal accidents
[Guest]: that have happened with autonomous cars
[Guest]: was when an autonomous car mistook the back of a truck
[Guest]: literally for an advertising billboard and tried to go under it.
[Guest]: So you can have horrifying situations if this goes wrong.
[Guest]: Now, a self-teaching program like AlphaZero
[Guest]: might cut the human intensive work hours
[Guest]: required to do this kind of programming
[Guest]: by orders of magnitude.
[Guest]: And that could be very, very useful
[Guest]: and it is quite possible that they would do it more efficiently as well.
[Guest]: If you're looking at this as an example,
[Guest]: it's quite possible that in a lot of cases
[Guest]: they would do it more efficiently as well.
[Guest]: If, for example, landing a spacecraft on Mars or the Moon
[Guest]: is completely autonomous, it has to be
[Guest]: because you're seven seconds away, I think,
[Guest]: from the Moon in terms of radio communication
[Guest]: and you're more than an hour away from Mars,
[Guest]: I think, if Mars is not at an average distance
[Guest]: between Earth and Mars.
[Guest]: So you obviously cannot send instructions and say,
[Guest]: now you put down your landing gear.
[Guest]: It's completely autonomous.
[Guest]: Now, that sort of thing,
[Guest]: if you could actually get the computer to teach itself,
[Guest]: it might do it more efficiently than you do.
[Guest]: So those are areas where I think
[Guest]: the specific techniques AlphaZero has come up with
[Guest]: could make a huge difference.
[Guest]: Obviously, we'll have to wait and see how this is applied.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the analogy that kind of comes to mind,
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, correct me if it doesn't sound right to you,
[Amit Varma]: is that, you know, what we can do is a known-known,
[Amit Varma]: but what computers can do with brute force, for example,
[Amit Varma]: would be a known-unknown, that you understand the process
[Amit Varma]: and you understand it's possible that it's calculating all these moves.
[Amit Varma]: So you kind of know what's going on.
[Amit Varma]: But the self-learning kind of computers like AlphaZero
[Amit Varma]: are sort of an unknown-unknown.
[Amit Varma]: We don't even understand what's going on.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I had a thinker called Ramesh Naam
[Amit Varma]: on this show a few months ago,
[Amit Varma]: and he was talking about AI,
[Amit Varma]: and he said something very interesting,
[Amit Varma]: and he said that AI is something people talk about
[Amit Varma]: as if it's in the future.
[Amit Varma]: You know, whenever what was AI yesterday
[Amit Varma]: actually becomes part of your life,
[Amit Varma]: you stop calling it AI.
[Amit Varma]: For example, our smartphones are basically
[Amit Varma]: the science fiction of 1990.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the kind of GPS that is the kind of...
[Amit Varma]: You know, all of the technology is essentially
[Amit Varma]: really advanced AI from a 1990 perspective,
[Amit Varma]: but we take it for granted.
[Amit Varma]: And I've always looked at AI as something that adds
[Amit Varma]: a lot of value to human life,
[Amit Varma]: and it's just overwhelmingly an awesome thing.
[Amit Varma]: But there's a lot of alarmism recently,
[Amit Varma]: and some of it actually comes from the self-learning nature
[Amit Varma]: of some of these machines and programs
[Amit Varma]: where people have been speculating about
[Amit Varma]: how these self-learning programs, so to say,
[Amit Varma]: could develop a consciousness and even wipe us out,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And how justified do you think is that kind of alarmism?
[Guest]: At a very practical level,
[Guest]: you now have things like lethal autonomous weaponry.
[Guest]: For example, you have the Israeli Iron Dome,
[Guest]: which stops rocket attacks into Israel.
[Guest]: It is an autonomous system.
[Guest]: If it sees...
[Guest]: If it senses, rather, that there is an airborne object
[Guest]: approaching at a speed,
[Guest]: it will launch its rockets to knock that out of the sky.
[Guest]: Something similar to protect army bases in Afghanistan
[Guest]: at a narrower level.
[Guest]: The Koreans have put up what they call sentry guns,
[Guest]: which is an autonomous weapon on a militarized zone,
[Guest]: where if it notices a movement and it's using...
[Guest]: It's searching across radar, infrared, what have you.
[Guest]: It sends out...
[Guest]: It actually has a mic loudspeaker which says,
[Guest]: OK, friend or foe.
[Guest]: And if the response does not come up
[Guest]: with the password of the day, so to speak,
[Guest]: it can launch grenades, it can shoot,
[Guest]: or it can just ring an alarm.
[Guest]: Now, you take that one step further,
[Guest]: it is possible to program a drone, a small drone,
[Guest]: with face recognition and send it out
[Guest]: and say that, well, if you see a guy who looks like this,
[Guest]: shoot him or explode in his face.
[Guest]: There was a seven-minute documentary movie
[Guest]: done recently for the UN conference
[Guest]: on conventional weapons,
[Guest]: which demonstrated how this is possible.
[Guest]: And you could send out swarms of these creatures,
[Guest]: using the word loosely,
[Guest]: and they could be programmed to, you know,
[Guest]: fire explosive darts whenever they found somebody
[Guest]: who was a target.
[Guest]: Now, that sort of thing is already practically possible.
[Guest]: And it's not in the realm of the self-aware and conscious
[Guest]: and what have you.
[Guest]: But it is already practically possible.
[Guest]: There are no laws against it
[Guest]: in terms of, say, the Geneva Convention.
[Guest]: And obviously, many governments are tempted
[Guest]: to develop and deploy weaponry like this.
[Guest]: For example, India would be very interested
[Guest]: in putting up something like a sentry gun
[Guest]: on the line of actual control.
[Guest]: So that is one of those areas
[Guest]: where AI could lead very rapidly
[Guest]: into the realm of what is now science fictional,
[Guest]: but will not be in a matter of a couple of years.
[Guest]: And that's more likely to happen than, you know,
[Guest]: when AI develops consciousness and decides to kill all human beings.
[Guest]: That's maybe a little far-fetched at the moment,
[Guest]: but an AI which is told to go out and kill everybody
[Guest]: who is, you know, 5 feet 9 inches,
[Guest]: between 5 feet 9 inches and 5 feet 11 inches tall,
[Guest]: and happens to have a skin color which is between this and this,
[Guest]: is entirely possible.
[Amit Varma]: And it could be done by rogue elements as much as military,
[Guest]: it could be done by, you know, a bright 19-year-old
[Guest]: buying stuff off the shelves
[Guest]: and putting together a face recognition program.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, and you know, you've done a previous episode
[Amit Varma]: of The Seen and The Unseen with me
[Amit Varma]: where we spoke about privacy.
[Amit Varma]: And another recent example of AI in my life
[Amit Varma]: was when I was discussing Malwani cuisine with a friend,
[Amit Varma]: and it was not something I had searched for
[Amit Varma]: or looked up online or anything.
[Amit Varma]: It was just a verbal discussion.
[Amit Varma]: And the next time I go online,
[Amit Varma]: there's an ad right there for Malwani cuisine on, you know,
[Amit Varma]: whichever app I open,
[Amit Varma]: which a lot of people kind of find eerie
[Amit Varma]: and others would say,
[Amit Varma]: hey, it's a feature, not a bug.
[Amit Varma]: In general, looking ahead at artificial intelligence,
[Amit Varma]: would you say that the future seems more utopian
[Guest]: or dystopian to you?
[Guest]: I think technology itself tends to be morally agnostic.
[Guest]: So it's, you know, you can use this sort of technology
[Guest]: equally as a force for good.
[Guest]: So that is entirely possible,
[Guest]: and you could use it for all sorts of things.
[Guest]: For example, the whole thing of
[Guest]: an autonomous AI ambulance has been thought of
[Guest]: where, you know, it just goes there,
[Guest]: takes a few pictures,
[Guest]: diagnoses what the problem is,
[Guest]: delivers emergency services.
[Guest]: That kind of thing has already been thought up.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it could possibly get to a venue where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, before something happens.
[Guest]: Yes, quite possibly.
[Guest]: If you go with the fact that, you know,
[Guest]: there's a lot of programming happening on
[Guest]: using social media to figure out that,
[Guest]: okay, somebody is suicidal, for example,
[Guest]: and he's posting on social media,
[Guest]: and you couldn't get there.
[Guest]: So that kind of thing is entirely possible.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, in fact, for those who say there's no free will,
[Amit Varma]: then everything just becomes a data crunching exercise.
[Amit Varma]: Devangshu, thanks so much for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: I had a great time talking to you.
[Guest]: You're welcome.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed the show,
[Amit Varma]: do follow Devangshu on Twitter at Devangshu Dutta.
[Amit Varma]: That's D-E-V-A-N-G-S-H-U-D-A-T-D-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma,
[Amit Varma]: A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: Also follow IVM Podcast for a bunch of other great podcasts
[Amit Varma]: on Facebook and Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: And for past episodes of The Scene and The Unseen,
[Amit Varma]: just head on over to sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Have a great week.
[Amit Varma]: Episodes out every Thursday.
[Unknown]: Happy listening.